Kantara (film)

Directed by	Rishab Shetty
Written by	Rishab Shetty, Anirudh Mahesh, Shanil Guru, Raj B. Shetty, Sham Prasad, Prakash Tuminad
Produced by	Vijay Kiragandur
Starring	Rishab Shetty, Sapthami Gowda, Kishore, Achyuth Kumar
Cinematography	Arvind S. Kashyap
Edited by	K. M. Prakash, Pratheek Shetty
Music by	B. Ajaneesh Loknath
Production company	Hombale Films
Distributed by	Hombale Films
Release date	30 September 2022
Running time	148 minutes
Country		India
Language	Kannada
Budget	₹16 crore
Box office	est.₹ 450 crore

Kantara (transl. Mystical Forest) is a 2022 Indian Kannada-language action thriller film[20][21] written and directed by Rishab Shetty, and produced by Vijay Kiragandur,[22] under Hombale Films. The film stars Rishab Shetty in a dual role with Kambala champion who is at loggerheads with an upright forest officer, Murali (played by Kishore).

Set and filmed in Keradi in coastal Karnataka, principal photography began in August 2021.[23] The cinematography was handled by Arvind S. Kashyap, with B. Ajaneesh Loknath scoring music for the film and the action sequences were choreographed by the action director Vikram More. The production design was handled by debutant, Dharani Gange Putra.

The film was released on 30 September 2022 to critical acclaim, with praise for its cast performances (particularly those of Shetty and Kishore), direction, soundtrack, and the portrayal of Bhuta Kola. It was a major commercial success and emerged as the second highest-grossing Kannada film of all time after K.G.F: Chapter 2, released the same year. It was also 2022's fourth highest-grossing film in India. A prequel called Kantara: Chapter 1 has been announced. Kantara was featured at the 54th IFFI Indian panorama section,[24] where it won the Silver Peacock - Special Jury Award.[25] During the promotion of his latest film as a producer, Rishab Shetty mentioned that the Kannada version alone attracted an audience of 1.25 crore in Karnataka.

Plot
The story spans several time periods, following the consequences of a promise made to a deity, Panjurli Daiva, by a king in 1847. The king, seeking peace, encounters Panjurli in a forest and donates a large portion of his land to the villagers in exchange for a holy stone. Panjurli warns the king that if his descendants ever try to reclaim the land, they will face the wrath of Guliga Daiva, a fierce demigod.

In 1970, a descendant of the king tries to reclaim the land, but a Bhoota Kola performer, possessed by Panjurli, refuses his request and foretells his doom if he proceeds to court. As predicted, the descendant mysteriously dies on the courthouse steps, sealing his fate.

In 1990, the plot focuses on Shiva, the son of the missing Bhoota Kola performer, who is now a Kambala athlete. Shiva refuses to perform the Bhoota Kola due to trauma from his father's disappearance. Murali, a forest officer, is tasked with converting the villagers' land into a forest reserve, leading to a clash between him and Shiva. Shiva is supported by Devendra, the current descendant of the king, who secretly plans to seize the land for himself. Devendra kills Shiva’s cousin Guruva, who was performing the Bhoota Kola in Shiva’s place, when Guruva refuses to manipulate the villagers into giving up the land.

Devendra deceives Shiva into believing that Murali killed Guruva, but Shiva eventually learns the truth. With the villagers informed of Devendra’s treachery by Murali, Shiva and Murali put aside their differences and unite the village against Devendra. During the final battle, Shiva is nearly defeated but becomes possessed by Guliga Daiva after hitting his head on Panjurli's stone. Empowered by the demigod, Shiva kills Devendra and his henchmen.

After the battle, Shiva finally performs the Bhoota Kola and is possessed by Panjurli, bringing peace to the village. Later, he disappears into the forest, seemingly following the spirit of his father. In the mid-credits scene, Shiva and Leela's son inquires about his father’s mysterious disappearance, continuing the legacy of the family’s connection to the deities.

Cast
Rishab Shetty in a dual role as Kaadubettu Shiva, Kantara's son and a Kambala champion, who gets possessed by Guliga Daiva and Panjurli Daiva
Kantara, Shiva's father and a Daiva Kola performer
Sapthami Gowda as Leela, Shiva's Love interest
Kishore as Murali, a Deputy Range Forest Officer (D.R.F.O)
Achyuth Kumar as Devendra Suttooru
Pramod Shetty as Sudhakara
Prakash Thuminad as Raampa
Manasi Sudhir as Kamala, Shiva's mother
Naveen D Padil as Lawyer
Suchan Shetty as Ravi
Swaraj Shetty as Guruva, Shiva's cousin
Deepak Rai Panaaje as Sundara
Shanil Guru as Bulla
Pradeep Shetty as Mohana
Rakshith Ramachandra Shetty as Devendra's Henchman
Prabhakar Kundar as Madhavacharya, Swordsmith
Chandrakala Rao as Sheela, Sundara's Wife
Sukanya as Ammakka, Devendra's Wife
Sathish Acharya as Tabara, Leela's Father
Pushparaj Bollar as Garnall Abbu
Raghu Pandeshwar as Raghu, Forest Officer
Mime Ramdas as Naaru
Basuma Kodagu as Guruva's father
Ranjan Saju as Lacchu
Rajeev Shetty as Rajeev Bhandari
Atish Shetty as Devendra's specially-abled son
Radhakrishna Kumbale as a native resident
Naveen Bondel as Demigod Interpreter
Cameo appearances
Shine Shetty as Devendra's father
Vinay Biddappa as the King
Pragathi Rishab Shetty as the King's wife

Production
Development
Director Rishab Shetty cited the conflict between nature and human beings as the theme of the film,[23] while adding specifically that the strife between forest officers and the inhabitants in his hometown Keradi, Karnataka, in the 1990s, as the source of inspiration for the film. He further added, "It is a film from our land, from our roots, stories that are heard through generations, untapped and deeply rooted to our culture".[26] Shetty conceived the story in 2021 during the COVID-19 lockdown.[23] Elaborating on the title of the film, he said, "Kantara is a mysterious forest and this is a story that happens around the area... The film title has a tagline calling it a dhanta kathe or a legend. I did not want to give the film a straight or direct title. The word is not used often. While it has Sanskrit origins, it is used in Kannada too. It is used in Yakshagana too, where we call a very mysterious forest Kantara".[27]

Filming
The film had to present three timelines: 1847, 1970s and 1990s. Since many references through books were not available, the makers took the help of the tribes residing in Keradi where it was also filmed. Costume designer Pragathi Shetty stated that the makers "travelled the entire village and met the tribal community, who gave details about their dress". She added, "We had most of the junior artists roped in from Kundapura, and it was a challenge for me to convince them to wear tribal costumes. We also took reference to design the costume for the forest guard, played by Sapthami Gowda. We heard each year, the colour of the uniform would change, and everything, including the badges was customised". Filming took place in four forest locations in the area which included a set being built reflecting the 1990s. Art director Darani Gangeputra said, "A lot of natural sources were used to create the setups", further adding, "apart from this, we created a school, temple, and a tree house. We had 35 people from Bangalore and 15 people from the Keradi village, who helped us to study the culture".[28] The set involved a village, including rustic homes with cowsheds, coops for hens, courtyards, areca plantations and an authentic Kambala racetrack. Shetty learned about the intricacies of Kambala and trained for four months before performing the sequence for the film in early 2022.[29]

Music
Main article: Kantara (soundtrack)
The music of the film was composed by B. Ajaneesh Loknath. Alongside him, 30–40 musicians were brought in. Mostly involving folk music represented using Jaanapada songs using traditional instruments, the team took was assisted by Mime Ramdas. Songs usually sung by common people during crop harvest and those popular among the tribals of the area were used as a part of the album and the background score.[28] The song "Varaha Roopam" was supposedly plagiarised from the song "Navarasam" as claimed by the band Thaikkudam Bridge which released Navarasam in 2017. This song gives a nostalgic feeling.[30] When the film was released on Amazon Prime, the song was modified with a new orchestral arrangement and vocals while the lyrics remained the same.[31] After a brief legal battle, the plagiarism case was finally dismissed by the Kerala High Court on 25 October 2023 after the parties involved reached a private settlement and the original song was returned to the movie.[32]

Release
Kantara was released in theatres in Kannada on 30 September 2022 in more than 250 theatres across Karnataka, and simultaneously in the US, UK, Europe, Middle East and Australia among other places globally.[33] After the success in Kannada, the makers announced that the film will be dubbed in Telugu, Hindi, Tamil and Malayalam languages and was released on 14 October 2022 in Hindi and 15 October 2022 in Telugu and Tamil.[34][35] Though the Hindi version was announced to be released in over 800 screens across the country,[36] later it was reported to be released in 2500 screens in the Hindi version.[37] Following a social media campaign based on the film's connection to Tulu culture,[38] a Tulu language dub of the film was announced, with a release date of 25 November 2022 outside of India and 2 December in India.[31][39] It became the first Kannada movie to be released in Vietnam.[40]

Home media
The satellite rights of the film were acquired by Star India Network for the Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Tulu languages. The rights of the Hindi version were acquired by Sony Max. The digital rights of the film were secured by Amazon Prime Video, and was digitally streamed from 24 November 2022 in Kannada, Telugu, Malayalam, Tamil languages.[41][42] The Hindi version was streamed on Netflix from 9 December 2022, and was also announced by the platform that an English dubbed version of the film will be available for streaming in January 2023.[43]

Reception
Box office
The film had an impressive box office run, starting with a first-day gross of approximately ₹6 crore and reaching ₹22.3 crore by the first weekend. In its first week, the film grossed around ₹38-50 crore, with over 19 lakh footfalls in Karnataka. By the end of the second week, it grossed ₹70 crore in Karnataka alone and surpassed other major releases like Ponniyin Selvan: I and Godfather. It crossed ₹100 crore within 15–17 days and ₹150 crore in 18 days, reaching a gross of ₹170 crore globally by the third week.

The film's success continued, collecting over ₹200 crore by the 25th day and surpassing ₹300 crore by day 33. It set records with the highest sixth and seventh weekend collections for an Indian film, beating Baahubali 2: The Conclusion. By the 50th day, the film grossed ₹370-377 crore worldwide and exceeded 1 crore footfalls in Karnataka. It continued to break records, crossing the ₹400 crore mark in 53 days and breaching ₹450 crore in 74 days. The film eventually crossed ₹500 crore, making it one of the highest-grossing Kannada films of all time.

Telugu version
The Telugu version grossed ₹5 crore on its first day.[90] The Telugu version grossed ₹21.15 crore in its first week.[91] The Telugu version grossed ₹28 crore in 10 days.[92] The Telugu version also grossed ₹9 crore in 4 days (from 21 to 24 October) outperforming other Diwali releases.[93][94] The movie collected ₹50.30 crore in 25 days run from the Telugu states.[95] The Telugu version grossed ₹60 crore in 39 days with a net collection of ₹42 crore during the same period.[96]

Hindi version
The first-day net collection of the Hindi version was reported to be around ₹1.27–1.5 crore.[97] The first-weekend collection of the Hindi version was ₹8 crore.[98] The movie earned nett collections of ₹15 crore in the Hindi version at the end of its first week run.[99] The net collections of the Hindi version was ₹29.1 crore in 13 days, crossing the lifetime domestic net collections of the Hindi version of Ponniyin Selvan: I.[100] The nett collections of the Hindi version was ₹31.7 crore at the end of two weeks.[101] The nett collections of the Hindi version at the end of 3 weeks was ₹51.50 crore.[102] The movie collected ₹2.10 crore on its fourth Friday which was higher than the three new Hindi releases of that week.[103] Despite the film running for three weeks, it saw its highest ever box office number (₹4.5 crore) on its fourth sunday, taking the total nett collections to ₹62.40 crore at the end of 24 days.[104] At the end of four weeks, it collected ₹69.75 crore nett.[105] At the end of five weeks, it collected ₹79.25 crore nett.[106] The Hindi version grossed ₹96 crore in 39 days with a nett collections of ₹82 crore.[96] Its gross of ₹12.7 crore in the eighth week was the highest grossing eighth week collection for a Hindi movie breaking the 21-year-old record of Gadar: Ek Prem Katha (2001) which had grossed ₹7 crore in its eighth week.[107] It earned 80 times its first day net collections – the highest for a dubbed movie.

Impact
The Government of Karnataka, in response to the movie, has initiated a monthly allowance for Buta Kola performers who are above the age of 60.

Prequel
It was said that in Mangalore, Shetty had sought the permission of the god Panjurli to film a prequel. The prequel titled Kantara: Chapter 1 will begin filming in November 2023 and is scheduled to release in late 2024. The first look was released on 27 November 2023